# toytools -- A collection of functions to handle toyzero dataset

`toytools` provides a number of handy functions, pytorch Datasets and scripts
to work with data produced by the `toyzero` package.

# Installation
`toytools` is intended for developers, so the best way to install it is to run
```
python setup.py develop
```

## Requirements
The `toytools` package has two mandatory dependencies: `numpy` and `pandas`.
If you would like to use pytorch Datasets, then you would need `pytorch`
installed. Some scripts also depend on `tqdm` to display pretty progress bars.


# Overview
The contents of the `toytools` package can be logically separated into several
categories:
* PyTorch Datasets
* Generic Functions
* Scripts

Below you will find a brief overview of each.


## PyTorch Datasets

Logically, there are two classes of toyzero datasets:

- Version 0 datasets: `SimpleToyzeroDataset`, `PreSimpleToyzeroDataset`,
  `PreUnalignedToyzeroDataset`, `PreCroppedToyzeroDataset`. These datasets
  return pairs of images, where the first element is from domain "a" ("fake"
  domain) and the second is from domain "b" ("real" domain).

  These datasets implement their own random sampling that is not easy to use in
  a multiprocessing setting.

- Version 1 datasets: `PreSimpleToyzeroDatasetV1`,
  `PreCroppedToyzeroDatasetV1`.  These datasets are similar to their v0
  counterparts, but return a single image, either from domain "a" or domain
  "b", depending on how they were instantiated.

  Version 1 datasets support only deterministic sampling and therefore require
  a separate random sampler. But, on the upside, there are no surprises when
  one uses these datasets in the multiprocessing setting.


### SimpleToyzeroDataset
This is very simplistic datasets object that loads `toyzero` images on demand.
It supports cropping images, filtering images based on the wire plane,
automatically separates dataset into training and validation parts.

If image cropping is required, this dataset tries its best to select only
regions of the image that contain signal. It retries random cropping up to 100
times to find signal regions of the image. However, some `toyzero` images are
completely empty, so this approach fails for such images.


### PreSimpleToyzeroDataset
This is another simplistic dataset object that loads `toyzero` images according
to a preprocessed list, obtained with the `scripts/preprocess` script.
Usage of the preprocessed list of images significantly speeds up image loading
times, since there is no need to perform expensive search of signal regions
in the image. Preprocessing also removes completely empty images from the
dataset.

Similar to `SimpleToyzeroDataset`, `PreSimpleToyzeroDataset` automatically
separates the preprocessed dataset into training and validation parts.


### PreUnalignedToyzeroDataset
This dataset behavior is similar to the `PreSimpleToyzeroDataset`, except that
it returns unpaired images during the training phase. During the testing and
validation phases, the returned images are paired as in
`PreSimpleToyzeroDataset`.


### PreCroppedToyzeroDataset
This dataset loads cropped images created by the `precrop` script. It supports
returning either paired or unpaired images depending on the constructor
arguments.


### NOTE
All datasets described in this section are implemented in a `pytorch`
independent way. This allows datasets reuse with other frameworks.

You can use `get_toyzero_dataset` to select a `pytorch`-independent dataset
based on its name.  The `get_toyzero_dataset_torch` will select a
`pytorch`-dependent dataset.


## Generic Functions

`toytools` comes with a variety of functions to handle `toyzero` data:

* `toytools.collect` -- contains functions to search for images in the toyzero
  image directory, parse image names, perform filtering based on image APA
  or wire plane, and load the images themselves.

* `toytools.transform` -- contains functions to determine background value
  of the image, determine whether given image is empty, crop images, and
  search for regions of image that contain signal.

* `toytools.plot` -- a few functions to simplify plotting of the `toyzero`
  images.

## Scripts

You can find four scripts in the `scripts` directory:
1. `preprocess`
2. `view_dataset`
3. `train_test_split`
4. `precrop`

### preprocess

This script can be used to preprocess images of the toyzero dataset.
Preprocessing includes determining the background value of the image
and selection of randomly cropped regions of the image, that contain signal.
Filtering images based on APA and Wire Plane is also supported.

The results of preprocessing are saved in a `csv` file, suitable to be used
with the `PreSimpleToyzeroDataset` dataset.

The preprocessing is a rather slow procedure, so `preprocess` script relies on
a high degree of process based parallelism.

### view_dataset
This script can be used to plot images generated by various datasets
(e.g. `SimpleToyzeroDataset` or `PreSimpleToyzeroDataset`). The images can
be either viewed in an interactive mode (default), or saved to files in a batch
mode (when the ```--plotdir``` argument is specified).

### train_test_split

This script can be used to split the preprocessed list of image crops
(created with the `preprocess` script) into training and test parts.

### precrop

This script extracts cropped regions found with `preprocess` script and saves
them as seperate images, performing training/validation split in process. The
extracted cropped regions have their background value subtracted as well. They
can be loaded with the `PreCroppedToyzeroDataset` dataset.

Extracting cropped regions significantly speeds up subsequent data loading.


# Usage Examples

## Generate Image Crops

To generate image crops of shape 512x512 for the U plane you can use the
following command
```
python scripts/preprocess --plane U -n 4 --min-signal 500 -s 512x512 \
   /path/to/data LABEL
```

Here, `-n 4` controls the number of crops to extract from a single image.
The parameter `--min-signal 500` indicates the threshold value of the nonzero
pixels to keep cropped image. If number of nonzero pixels after cropping
is less than 500, then the cropped image will be discarded the the cropping
process retried. `/path/to/data` is the directory where your `toyzero` dataset
is located. Finally, `LABEL` is a label that will be given to the cropping
dataset (this label will be embedded into generated dataset name).

After the preprocess script finished its run it will create a file
`LABEL-U-512x512.csv` that contains a list of cropped regions.


## Splitting Genearted Image Crops into Train/Test Parts

To split the generated image crops into training and validation parts we can
run the `train_test_split` script like
```
python scripts/train_test_split \
   --test-size 4000 /path/to/data/LABEL-U-512x512.csv
```

It will split the preprocessed image crops `/path/to/data/LABEL-U-512x512.csv`
into two parts:

* Training samples `/path/to/data/LABEL-U-512x512-train.csv`
* Test samples `/path/to/data/LABEL-U-512x512-test.csv`


## Viewing Image Crops

The generated image crops can be viewed with the help of the `view_dataset`
script:
```
python scripts/view_dataset --dataset toyzero-presimple \
    --data_args '{ "fname": "LABEL-U-512x512.csv" }' -i :100 \
    /path/to/data --plotdir /path/to/plot_dir
```

This script will load the toyzero image crops from the file
`LABEL-U-512x512.csv`, plot 100 cropped samples (`-i :100`), and save the
plots under `/path/to/plot_dir`.


## Extracting Image Crops

Loading entire event images from the disk is a very slow process and could
easily make the training CPU bound. To speed up image loading, one can add one
more preprocessing step and extract image crops with the help of the `precrop`
script. For example, running
```
python scripts/precrop /path/to/data/LABEL-U-512x512.csv /output/directory
```

will extract image crops according to the precomputed file
`LABEL-U-512x512.csv` and save them as `.npz` files under `/output/directory`.

The resulted crops can be later loaded with the help of the
`PreCroppedToyzeroDataset` dataset.


